Your lungs expand to bring in life’s
essential gas, oxygen from the air.
Expanded lungs naturally contract
to expel the body’s waste gas, carbon dioxide.
Your lungs usually expand
and contract in two main ways.
One is an unconscious downward
and upward movement of a thin muscle
called the diaphragm,
which separates the chest from the belly.
The other way is by raising or lowering
the ribs to increase
or decrease the volume of the chest cavity.
We breathe in or inhale
when the diaphragm contracts;
this pulls the lower part of the lungs downward.
When we breathe out or exhale,
the diaphragm and lungs relax
and return to their resting positions.
Quiet, deep belly breathing
is a more consciously-controlled breathing that,
with practice, can become the standard way you breathe.
Deep belly breathing aids the diaphragm
muscle movement by expanding
and contracting the abdomen,
the area below the diaphragm.
This allows the belly muscles to push
stomach and diaphragm up,
which forces out more carbon dioxide waste.